[USING] Move Change FAQ to separate chapter (#337)
zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc: docs/using-wasabi/ChangeCoins.md

---
{
  "title": "Change Coins",
  "description": "Details about the privacy of different types of change and strategies how to use them. This is the Wasabi documentation, an archive of knowledge about the open-source, non-custodial and privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet for desktop."
}
---

# Change coins

[[toc]]

## Why change is an issue

You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1 coins` with `anonymity set > 1 coins` wherever possible, because this will link your `anonymity set > 1 coin` to the coin you merge it with.
Note that, this is also true if you merge them in a mix, however that is slightly less problematic, because some blockchain analysis techniques become [computationally infeasible](https://www.comsys.rwth-aachen.de/fileadmin/papers/2017/2017-maurer-trustcom-coinjoin.pdf).

It is also important that you do not send different coins to the same receiving address (even if performed as separate transactions) as this will also link the coins together, damaging your privacy.

## Types of change

> There are two different types of zero link change:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two different types of ZeroLink change:
```

Author: outdated, will fix in the recent oen

> When you have a KYC coin with red anonset 1 and you register it for CoinJoin, then you get one anonset 100 green coin and one red anonset 1 change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have a KYC coin with red anonset 1 and you register it for CoinJoin, then you get one anonset 100 green coin (if 100 peers are registered in the CoinJoin) and one red anonset 1 change.
```

Author: idk, do you think we need to specify this here? 
I think it's ok to assume that we just have the 100 peers register, which is most of the time when we have higher liquidity soon

### Consolidate several change coins, but in a CoinJoin directly.
If you would consolidate many change coins in a regular non-CoinJoin transaction in the `Send` tab, then any outside observer can easily see that one user controls all these coins.
Because there are hundreds of randomly ordered inputs in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.
However, during the [input registration phase](/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.md#what-is-happening-in-the-input-registration-phase), your wallet provides an input proof for all the registered coins to the coordinator.
Thus the coordinator knows that you control all these coins, and although zkSNACKs claims to not keep any logs, it is a reasonable assumption that everyone knows what the coordinator knows.
In this CoinJoin you get an equal value mixed coin, which is no longer tied to any of your change coins, and a change output that can be tied to these inputs.
So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is strictly better than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive information to the coordinator.

### Mix with Joinmarket.

> In [Joinmarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) as a market taker you can specify exactly what denomination of equal value outputs are generated in the CoinJoin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [JoinMarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) as a market taker you can specify exactly what denomination of equal value outputs are generated in the CoinJoin.
```

So you can send the Wasabi change to your Joinmarket wallet and take an offer to mix for some rounds.
The coin you will receive after the tumbling algorithm can have sufficient anonymity set, and you can use it for spending again.

> ### Open a lightning network channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Open a Lightning Network channel.
```

> The lightning network can be a very private way of sending bitcoin, and you can choose the channel size to be exactly the size of your change coin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Lightning Network can be a very private way of sending bitcoin, and you can choose the channel size to be exactly the size of your change coin.
```

> However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main lightning node public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main Lightning node public key.
```

> So a good strategy is to create a new lightning node and public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So a good strategy is to create a new Lightning node and relative public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network.
```

Author: `relative public key`? never heard of this in the context?

Reviewer: > `relative public key`? never heard of this in the context?

Sorry I meant "related", not relative :)

> Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main lightning node for further use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main Lightning node for further use.
```

After the balance of the channel is entirely on the other side, cooperatively close the channel with your peer, so that he gets the only output in the closing transaction.

> Since Wasabi does not yet support lightning network functionality, you must use a different wallet for this task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Wasabi does not yet support Lightning Network functionality, you must use a different wallet for this task.
```

---
{
  "title": "Change Coins",
  "description": "Details about the privacy of different types of change and strategies how to use them. This is the Wasabi documentation, an archive of knowledge about the open-source, non-custodial and privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet for desktop."
}
---

# Change coins

[[toc]]

## Types of change

### Non CoinJoin change

When you want to buy some coffee from Alice, then in the `Send` tab you select one or more of your own coins, and they are the input of the transaction, for example one red shield `anonymity set 1` coin worth 2 bitcoin.
You put Alice's address in the `Receiving Address` field, and set the spending `Amount`, for example 0.5 bitcoin, this will be the first output of the transaction.
The left over amount of 1.5 bitcoin will automatically go to a new address that you control, and this is the change output.

> This change coin can easily be tied to the input of the transaction, and thus also has `anonymity set 1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change coin is tied to the input of the transaction, and thus also has `anonymity set 1`.
```
What about this? I think when you say `it can be tied` this means it is just a possibility but that is not true because the change `is` tied to the input.

So when you send this change coin in a next transaction, this receiver knows that you were part of the transaction to Alice.

### First round CoinJoin change

> When you have a KYC coin with red anonset 1 and you register it for CoinJoin, then you get one anonset 100 green coin and one red anonset 1 change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you have a KYC red shield `anonymity set 1` coin and you register it for CoinJoin, you get one green coin `anonymity set 100` and one red shield `anonymity set 1` change coin.
```

This change is very clearly tied to your KYC input coin, but the CoinJoin output is pretty good with anonset 100.
If you combine that red coin with the green, then it's clear that both of them belong to you, and thus the anonset of the output in this transaction becomes the lowest common denominator, in this case anonset 1.

### Second round CoinJoin change

When you take a 100 anonset coin, and you register it again for CoinJoin, then you get one coin with anonset 200, and one change with anonset 100.
This change has anonset 100 because it can be linked to the input of the second CoinJoin, but this coin has anonset 100 already.
This change can still reveal premix history which is another CoinJoin, therefore you cannot go further back.
So, it might be ok to send this second change output to some place, or even consolidate it, because it still has anonset.

## Why change is an issue

Change is not inherently bad, it's a fundamental part of how Bitcoin and the UTXO model works.
However, when spending a change coin, then the receiver can easily deduce that the sender was also part of the previous transaction that generated the change.

> You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1 coins` with `anonymity set > 1 coins` wherever possible, because this will link your `anonymity set > 1 coin` to the coin you merge it with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1` coin with `anonymity set > 1` coin whenever possible, because this will link your `anonymity set > 1` coin to the coin you merge it with.
```

Now in the second transaction where you want to send Alice 0.05 bitcoin, you can select that 0.06 bitcoin change coin without loosing any privacy, because Alice already knows this is your coin.
In this second transaction you will get back 0.01 bitcoin as change.
If in a third transaction you want to send Alice 0.02 bitcoin, then you can consolidate the 0.01 bitcoin change with a new 0.1 bitcoin mixed coin, thus getting 0.09 bitcoin change.
Now Alice will know that you owned that 0.1 bitcoin and the 0.09 bitcoin change, but she cannot find out about your premix transaction history.

### Spend the change to another entity, if these two won't make you trouble knowing you interact with both of them.
For example when with a 0.1 bitcoin mixed coin you buy coffee from Alice for 0.01 bitcoin, you get back 0.09 bitcoin change that Alice knows is yours.
If in the next transaction you spend the 0.09 bitcoin change in the pizza restaurant of Bob, then Alice might find out that you go to Bob's restaurant, and if she doesn't like that, then she can refuse to serve you coffee the next time, or even worse.

> But if instead you spend the 0.09 bitcoin change in a transaction to Carol, a good friend of Alice, then Alice might not care and will still give you coffee for the next round.

Reviewer 2: IMO we should remove all this, it is like saying "if you don't care about your privacy and it is ok with you that some people know about your transaction history then use the change as you like"

> and if she doesn't like that, **then she can refuse to serve you coffee the next time**

This is not the reason why I personally want to be private, because if it was this reason I would rather know Alice's behavior so I don't buy coffee from her again. She can dislike that I buy from Bob's restaurant but she can't refuse to serve me coffee the next time for that.

Author: yes, this chapter is about "don't care about privacy" - for this specific coin. and I think there are some scenarios where this is ok, and then it is a valid strategy, I do it on a selected basis too. 

But I was struggling when writing the example for this, so I will re-write it eventually, maybe someone knows a better example.

Because there are hundreds of randomly ordered inputs in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.
However, during the [input registration phase](/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.md#what-is-happening-in-the-input-registration-phase), your wallet provides an input proof for all the registered coins to the coordinator.
Thus the coordinator knows that you control all these coins, and although zkSNACKs claims to not keep any logs, it is a reasonable assumption that everyone knows what the coordinator knows.
In this CoinJoin you get an equal value mixed coin, which is no longer tied to any of your change coins, and a change output that can be tied to these inputs.
So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is strictly better than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive information to the coordinator.

### Mix with Joinmarket.
In [JoinMarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) as a market taker you can specify exactly what denomination of equal value outputs are generated in the CoinJoin.

> So you can send the Wasabi change to your Joinmarket wallet and take an offer to mix for some rounds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So you can send the Wasabi change to your JoinMarket wallet and take an offer to mix for some rounds.
```

### Open a Lightning Network channel.
The Lightning Network can be a very private way of sending bitcoin, and you can choose the channel size to be exactly the size of your change coin.
However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main Lightning node public key.
So a good strategy is to create a new lightning node and public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network.
Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main Lightning node for further use.
After the balance of the channel is entirely on the other side, cooperatively close the channel with your peer, so that he gets the only output in the closing transaction.
Since Wasabi does not yet support Lightning Network functionality, you must use a different wallet for this task.

### Consolidate several change coins, but in a CoinJoin directly.
If you would consolidate many change coins in a regular non-CoinJoin transaction in the `Send` tab, then any outside observer can easily see that one user controls all these coins.

> But when consolidating in a CoinJoin directly, because there are hundreds of randomly ordered inputs in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But when consolidating in a CoinJoin directly, because there are hundreds of ascending ordered inputs (not ordered by owner) in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.
```

Author: Are you sure about this @yahiheb ? I think it is literally randomly ordered.

Reviewer 2: I looked into some Wasabi CoinJoin transactions on some blockexplorers and the inputs and the outputs are ascending ordered. @nopara73

However, a well resourced attacker can perform [CoinJoin sudoku](/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.md#what-is-a-coinjoin-sudoku) to find out which several inputs fund the change output.
Further, during the [input registration phase](/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.md#what-is-happening-in-the-input-registration-phase), your wallet provides an input proof for all the registered coins to the coordinator.
Thus the coordinator knows that you control all these coins, and although zkSNACKs claims to not keep any logs, it is a reasonable assumption that everyone knows what the coordinator knows.

> In this CoinJoin you get an equal value mixed coin, which is no longer tied to any of your change coins, and a change output that can be tied to these inputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this CoinJoin you get an equal value mixed coin, which is no longer tied to any of your previous change coins (inputs), and a change output that can be tied to these inputs.
```

> So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is strictly more private and efficient than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive information to the coordinator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is strictly more private and efficient than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive informations.
```
I like the new version, only thing I'll still remove this last part about the coordinator.

Reviewer 2: In English the word “information” is an uncountable noun.

This change is clearly tied to your KYC input coin, but the green coin is not.
If you combine the red coin with the green one in a transaction, then it's clear that both of them belong to you, and thus the anonset of the output in this transaction becomes the lowest common denominator, in this case anonset 1.

### Second round CoinJoin change

When you take a 100 anonset coin, and you register it again for CoinJoin, then you get one coin with anonset 200, and one change with anonset 100.
This change still has anonset 100 because it is the change output of a second CoinJoin that used a 100 anonset coin as input.
This change can still reveal premix history which is another CoinJoin, therefore you cannot go further back.
So, it is ok to send this change output to some place, or even consolidate it, because it still has anonset 100.

## Why change is an issue

Change is not inherently bad, it's a fundamental part of how Bitcoin and the UTXO model works.
However, when spending a change coin, then the receiver can easily deduce that the sender was also part of the previous transaction that generated the change.

> When ever you are merging coins in one transaction, it becomes clear to any outside observer that these coins belong to the same entity, thus linking the previous transaction history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever you are merging coins in one transaction, it becomes clear to any outside observer that these coins belong to the same entity, thus linking the previous transaction history.
```

> You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1` coin with `anonymity set > 1` mixed coin whenever possible, because this will link these coins and negate the privacy gained through the CoinJoin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1` coins with `anonymity set > 1` mixed coins whenever possible, because this will link these coins and negate the privacy of the mixed coins gained through the CoinJoin.
```

So you can send the Wasabi change to your JoinMarket wallet and take an offer to mix for some rounds.
The coin you will receive after the tumbling algorithm can have sufficient anonymity set, and you can use it for spending again.

### Open a Lightning Network channel.
The Lightning Network can be a very private way of sending bitcoin, and you can choose the channel size to be exactly the size of your change coin.
However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main Lightning node public key.
So a good strategy is to create a new lightning node and public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network.
Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main Lightning node for further use.
After the balance of the channel is entirely on the other side, cooperatively close the channel with your peer, so that he gets the only output in the closing transaction.
Since Wasabi does not yet support Lightning Network functionality, you must use a different wallet for this task.

### Atomic swap into Lightning Network

> There are some services who provide an atomic swap where you send the whole change coin to a multisignature hashed time locked contract on-chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are some services that provide an atomic swap where you send the whole change coin to a multisignature hashed time locked contract on-chain.
```
